.TH "khost" "1" "April 2013" "CZ.NIC Labs" "Knot DNS, version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
.B khost
\- Simple DNS lookup utility (libknot equivalent of ISC host)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B khost
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIname\fR [\fIserver\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This utility sends a DNS query for the \fIname\fR to the \fIserver\fR and prints
a reply in more user-readable form. For more advanced DNS queries use \fBkdig\fR instead.
.TP 4
\fI name\fR
Is a domain name that is to be looked up.
If the \fIname\fR is IPv4 or IPv6 address the \fIPTR\fR query type is used.
.TP
\fI server\fR
Is a name or an address of the nameserver to send a query to. The address
can be specified using [address]:port notation. If no server is specified
the servers from \fB/etc/resolv.conf\fR are used.
.TP
If no arguments are provided, \fBkhost\fR prints short help.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 4
.BI -4
Use IPv4 protocol only.
.TP
.BI -6
Use IPv6 protocol only.
.TP
.BI -a
Send ANY query with verbose mode.
.TP
.BI -d
Enable debug messages if any.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print help.
.TP
.BI -r
Disable recursion.
.TP
.BI -s
Stop quering next nameserver if SERVFAIL response is received.
.TP
.BI -T
Use TCP protocol.
.TP
.BI -v
Enable verbose output.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print program version.
.TP
.BI -w
Wait forever for the reply.
.TP
.BI -c \ class
Set query class (e.g. \fICH\fR, \fICLASS4\fR). The default class is \fIIN\fR.
.TP
.BI -t \ type
Set query type (e.g. \fINS\fR, \fIIXFR=12345\fR, \fITYPE65535\fR).
The default is to send 3 queries (\fIA\fR, \fIAAAA\fR and \fIMX\fR).
.TP
.BI -R \ retries
The number of UDP retries to query a nameserver. The default is \fI1\fR.
.TP
.BI -W \ wait
The time to wait for a reply in seconds. The default is \fI2\fR seconds.
.SH EXAMPLES
.B Example 1. Get A, AAAA and MX records for example.com:
.TP
# khost example.com
.TP
.B Example 2. Get reverse record for address 192.0.2.1:
.TP
# khost 192.0.2.1
.TP
.B Example 3. Perform verbose zone transfer for zone example.com:
.TP
# khost -t AXFR -v example.com
.SH FILES
.BI /etc/resolv.conf
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel Salzman (\fBhttp://knot-dns.cz\fR)
.TP
Please send any bugs or comments to \fBknot-dns@labs.nic.cz\fR
.SH SEE ALSO
.BI kdig\fR(8),
.BI knsupdate\fR(8).
