@node Knot DNS Resource Requirements, Knot DNS Installation, Introduction, Top
@chapter Knot DNS Resource Requirements

@menu
* Hardware requirements::       
* CPU requirements::            
* Memory requirements::         
* Supported operating system::  
@end menu

@node Hardware requirements
@section Hardware requirements

Knot DNS requirements are not very demanding for typical
installations, and a comodity server or virtualized solution
will be sufficient in most cases.

However please not that there are some scenarios that will
require the administrator attention and a testing of exact
requirements before deploying Knot DNS in a production.  These
cases include deployment for a large number of zones (DNS
hosting), a large number of records in one or more zones (TLD)
or large number of requests.

@node CPU requirements
@section CPU requirements

Knot DNS scales with the processing power and also the nubmer of available cores/CPUs.

There is no lower bound on the CPU requirements, but it should support memory barriers
and CAS (i586 and newer).

@node Memory requirements
@section Memory requirements

Knot DNS implementation focuses on the performance and thus can
be very demanding for the memory.  The rough estimate for memory
requirements is 5-7 times of the size of the zone in text
format.  Again this is only a estimate and you are advised to do
your own measurements before deploying Knot DNS into the
production.

Also note that to ensure uninterrupted serving of the zone, Knot DNS employs
a Read-Copy-Update mechanism instead of locking and thus requires
twice the amount of memory for the duration of the incoming transfers.

@node Supported operating system
@section Supported operating system

Knot DNS itself is written in a portable way, but it depends on
userspace-rcu library, which is the main constraint when it
comes to the operating system support.  As far as we know the
Knot DNS and userspace-rcu library can be compiled and run on
Linux, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD and Mac OS X.
